Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Charlotte Bliss. She's an
interdisciplinary health researcher at the Department of Women's and
Children's Health at Uppsala University in Sweden. And also
the digital psychiatry division at the Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center at Harvard Medical School. And today we're
going to talk about her book, The Nocebo Effect,
When Words Make You Sick. So, Charlotte, welcome to
the show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Ricardo, it's, it's fantastic to be here at last.
Thanks for having me.
Great. So, OK, so we're going to talk about
the nocebo effect, but just before that, I would
like to ask you a little bit about the
placebo effect. So what is it?
The placebo effect is the better known of these
two effects, and it is the response that happens
as a result of patients expecting to feel better.
So as a result of expecting to feel better,
they actually do. Uh EXPERIENCE positive health benefits, and
it's particularly, it's considered to be particularly relevant to
experiences of pain, depression, anxiety, fatigue, and so on.
And there's actually quite a body of research now.
There's quite a mature body of research investigating the
placebo effect, um, but it's still quite a young
science, I will say. So, as an organized field
of research, while the so-called placebo effect has been
known for quite a while as an organized scientific
field, we're talking about 20 to 30 years old.
And what is the medical relevance of placebos? I
mean, why should we care about them from a
medical standpoint?
That's a great question. Um, THERE'S actually, um, two
ways to answer this question. So the first is,
um, The first is that placebos are used as
tools, methodological tools in the clinical trials, and to
that extent they're really a measuring instrument. So that's
the first particular usage um because there's lots of
noise in clinical trials, patients, you've got to screen
out for that noise. So if you want to
evaluate a particular treatment. And to see whether it's
effective for a condition, you need a placebo, which
is essentially should mimic everything about the treatment under
scrutiny, except for the particular ingredients, if you will,
that you think are going to make the difference.
You don't need to have a mechanistic story about
why they make a difference. You just have to
isolate them as best as you can. Um, THROUGH
the design of the placebo. So in that, so
placebos are relevant in that sense, and it's quite
seductive in a clinical trial scenario and a lot
of people um Think of placebos this way, including
researchers, but they tend to say placebos are sugar
pills, they're saline solutions. That's really not quite accurate
because the placebos, they say, should be a sort
of a measuring tool, so it should copy in
a sense what it is you're trying to measure
as far as possible. Um, SO it's like a
moving category of things. It's a control. One sense
in which we can think of the relevance of
placebos. The second sense is in a more clinical
setting. And here we're thinking more about the vernacular
in which people use the term placebo, and there's
almost a kind of family resemblance situation going on
descriptively about how physicians or think about placebos. But
in that scenario, we're thinking about a treatment that
might be offered to a patient, perhaps at a
primary care visit where the doctor doesn't think it's
going to be effective, um, but they think they're
offering him a placebo, but they just want to
see a face, offer a demanding patient something. Um,
THEY'RE not sure if it'll work. So if there
can be many reasons, it might actually work, or
they might actually want the illicit placebo effects, so
they give them something that they think the patient
will think will work, um, and. So there's that
separate area of of placebos in clinical practice, which
is, which means something slightly different. I think in
the field there's a tendency to talk across purposes
a little bit, so I, I welcome that question.
There's definitely a need for differentiation here.
And what is then the nocebo effect?
The nocebo effect, um. So the lesser known to
say of these these effects is sort of characterized
as the evil twin of the placebo effect. Um,
AND it is what happens when you have negative
expectations about a treatment or or intervention as a
result of which, you start to experience genuine negative
effects. Um, MUCH less research in in this, into
this phenomenon, but quite interesting studies, we'll get into
them a little later, but um, yeah, fascinating effect.
So, and this is also interesting because you come
at things from two different standpoints, both, both from
a philosophy standpoint and also from a medical standpoint.
So, as a philosopher, particularly, how do you approach
the nocebo effect?
Good question. So basically, I mean, when I think
about philosophy, my my PhD was in philosophy, um,
and this increasingly veered into quite an interdisciplinary health
research. But um I kind of go back to
Wilfred Sellers's description of philosophy, which is seeing how
things in the broadest sense of the term hang
together in the broadest possible sense of the term.
Philosophers in general can approach things like the nocebo
effects with the ultimate mind body effect in a
few different ways. Um, MY particular approach to these
issues has been epistemological in the sense, in almost
the most rudimentary sense of doing philosophy, which is
to say, what is you can't measure what you
first. DEFINED. So how do we define these these
terms and that sort of become the low lowest
hanging fruit in placebo studies, if you will, which
includes the nocebo effect. How are we defining these
terms? Are we talking across purposes sometimes? Um, SO
let's get clear about what those terms are and
then how we could possibly investigate them. Um, SO
related to that, I've also been interested in um
The replication crisis. So is it philosophical, it's evidence
based practice in a sense, but turning the question
in on the field, are we being robust enough
in our methodologies? Are we canonizing findings a little
bit too early? We need to show due diligence.
So again, it's the philosopher taking a step back
and somewhat finger wagging. It's not always appreciated, but
um. So that's, that's one perspective and another area
of philosophy is, is of course ethics, clinical ethics
and thinking what are the implications of these effects.
So the nocebo effect um is a fascinating almost
a disruptive force in healthcare because you want to
uh. Ultimately, you want to tell patients about the
potential risks of treatments, possible side effects. How do
you do that in a way that is honest
and open without causing side effects and and causing
potential harm or secondary harms to patients. Um, SO
that's another that's another area that I've I've been
interested in. Mhm.
So, later in our conversation, we're going to talk
about the importance of distinguishing between real side effects
of treatments, medication, and so on, and nocebo effects
and how we can do it. But at this
point, let me ask you, is there a risk
of over identifying the nocebo effect as the cause
behind very diverse phenomenon?
Yeah, absolutely. Um, AND we tend to see this
particularly as you say, Thomas talked about, you know,
the emergence of paradigms and research and it's hard
not to go back to that kind of appreciate
that kind of thinking when you look at the
emergence of research into the nocebo effect. So there
is a tendency, I think, to um over ascribe
certain phenomenon to nocebo effects. Um WE'RE not talking
about overtreatment. We're not and some people have suggested
that that might be the case and the nasty
side effects of over treating patients. It's not any
kind of side effect. We're talking about a very
specific. Kind of effect, negative effect that results from
expectations. Um, SO yeah, absolutely we've got to be
vigilant, I think about that. Um, AND I think
when there is a tendency, particularly when we're thinking
about something as negative as this as well, um,
maybe to, to get even more freaked out and
to start over ascribing or or. Uh, BUT, but
we, we really have to be careful in this,
this case, for sure. You know, if everything's a
nocebo effect, nothing's a nocebo effect.
Yeah. And when it comes to the harms that
come from overdiagnosis and overtreatment, should we treat them
as nocebo effects or are they more the result
of side effects of drugs and unnecessary treatment?
I think it it can be a whole amalgam
of different things. Um, SO it could be the
overtreatment, over medicalization, lower thresholds for diagnostic categories, for
example, in mental health conditions. These things could prompt
nocebo effects. Um, BUT again, we got to be
very careful about saying what it is we think
might do the the might elicit those kinds of
effects, and then, you know, result does that try
to find some ingenious way of of experimentally getting
at that or empirically getting at that. So Yeah,
That's uh Tricky question, but yeah. Mhm.
So, uh, and do we have a good understanding
of how nocebo effects are produced psychologically? I mean,
what are the psychological mechanisms that play a role
in them?
Another great question. Um, I think I guess I
would go back to we don't really have a
good um put my head above the part, but
we don't really have a good descriptive psychological depiction
of these effects. And I think the same is
actually fair to say in placebo, the placebo effect
as well. If you go back to David Marr,
the cognitive scientist who thought about different levels of
analysis, different questions you can ask in a particular
field. You can ask the question of of what
it is. What is the phenomenon that needs to
be described. I think what we have a tendency
to do when it comes to the psychology of
nocebo effects and placebo effects, is we have isolated
what it is. It's an expectancy response and some
say, in some sense. But when we drop the
second question is that Maridentified was, you know, not
just the what but how. Does this work? What's
the what's the mechanistic level to explain this phenomenon?
And I think we have a tendency in general
in psychology to to embark on a kind of
circular reasoning and just to say for the mechanistic
reason we're going to redescribe the thing that needs
to be better understood, and that is to say
it's expectancies that are, you know, but that doesn't
really offer us an edifying explanation. So there seems
to be this gap and what is, what are
the mechanisms, what's sort of the algorithmic level of
what's doing the work, the processing underneath, and then
of course there's the issue of the where this
instantiation and there we do have some interesting studies
in the nocebo effect on engaging um cortisol or
CCK is another hormone involved in anxiety responses. Um,
SO in general, we don't have a, we don't
have a fantastic story yet to tell about uh
the mechanisms, um, and then at the other side
of it, you know, can add the 4th, that
4th question of why does the nocebo effect exist?
So the ultimate explanations, um. And there we need
to, we could ask questions about is it a
evolutionary adaptation, a byproduct of an adaptation. Probably there's
something very interesting to say there too. In general,
it's probably a readiness, an anticipatory response, better to
over. Better to anticipate negative events in your environment
and be ready with a physiological response to them
and to err on the side of false positives
and false negatives. So I think it's not too
much of a stretch to tell a story there
about why those Now why effects arise and then
the issue is, are we eliciting them in modern
environments in ways that are not appropriate that are
mismatched in the very places that people want to
get help, hospitals, connects, and we're making people feel
more anxious. So yeah.
So, uh there is this common idea that if
nocebo effects are caused by negative expectations, then they
are merely all in the head. Uh, DOES it
make sense to think about them this way?
Uh, SO, good question. Um, AND we see pushback
particularly from patients when when we talk about these
kinds of phenomena that it's a sort of degradation
or discrediting, um. I think two ways to think
about that question, is it all in the head.
First is quite literally, um, and we can say
scientifically, is it all in the head? Well, it's
a nervous system response. Um, SO the nervous system
extends throughout the whole body, so it's not quite
all in the head. Um, BUT, and related to
that, we could say, look, if this is a
response, um, some capacity. CAPACITY that behavioral responses suite
of of behaviors and cognitions that as a result
of of observing something in the environment, you have
to have the cues in the environment to elicit
it. So it's not quite all again all in
the head, either from that respect. But the more
figurative, I suppose, um, common common. PARLANCE thinking about
is it all in the head. I would be
really wary about, again, saying that um that we
are diminishing certain responses in that way. And we've
got to be careful too, because medicine has a
history of gaslighting patients when it comes to conditions
that are medically unexplained. CONDITIONS like stroke, so called
chronic fatigues and more patients were in fact told
we can't find the reasons for this. We can't
see any causes for this condition. We can't understand
that to some extent it wasn't in the doctor's
head of the medical community's head, what was wrong.
So there go the explanations well it must all
be in the patient's head that they're making this
up or um this isn't a real condition. So,
um, I try to stay away from this all
in the heads. It's understandable to an extent, but
it's a very loaded description, um, and we would
not want to be saying many medical conditions are
the result of no effects. These are short-lived effects.
Um, THEY'RE probably not that severe, um, but they,
but they can, they can have repercussions for healthcare,
but I wouldn't want to be ascribing. Lots of
unknown medical conditions to this.
Right. So this is something that I think is
very important for us to try to understand. Uh,
HOW, how is the nocebo effect produced in the
clinical context? I mean, how is it that doctors
and other clinicians and intentionally harm patients through it?
Yeah, again, good question. So probably the best way
to answer this is by example. So it could
be through the power of suggestion, through what's communicated
to the patient, um. Including about side effects, um,
the manner in which it is communicated, um. Uh,
BUT also to some extent we might say that
the performance of medicine. So, uh, a couple of
interesting illustrative cases, um, Fabrizio Benedetti, who's a researcher
in placebo studies from Turin. DID a very interesting
what was called an open hidden style study. This
was published by 2003. Um, BUT basically in this
study, he had a postoperative pain patients and he
hasten to add this study probably wouldn't get ethical
approval today. But he randomly allocated them to um
Two conditions. One was that the truthful, the open
condition where the patients were told that their intravenous
pain medication had been disrupted and it had been
disrupted. And then the other condition, um they were
not informed that the morphine, the intravenous morphine had
been disrupted, even though it had been. And what
he found was those who were informed, uh, honestly
informed about what had happened, were much more likely
to request pain medication, uh needed higher dosages of
it, um, small, small trials. Um, BUT that sort
of offers a window to the potential, you know,
knowing that something has happened, you have a negative
expectation and you start to feel much worse as
a result. There's been other studies which are more
suggestive, um. For example, one with which is another
sort of almost canonized study in the field, but
done by an anesthetist Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
where he allocated patients be allocated patients to, he
was giving them a local anesthetic, and he said,
you know, I'm going to give you the anesthetic,
it's going to feel like a bee sting. Uh,
AND you know, patients actually felt reported much higher
levels of pain when they were told, I'm going
to give you an anesthetic and it's it's going
to make you feel better. So it's going to
reduce the pain or help you manage the situation.
So there have been studies like that which are
more suggestive and what you do find is patients
do report higher levels of pain and so on
when they're in the nocebo effect condition, um. I
don't want to prolong it, but another interesting study
think worse, uh listeners might be interested in it
was carried out by Lauren High, who is at
a crumbs or who was at a crumbs lab
and Stanford, which is a lab is conducted quite
a lot of interesting placebo research. Um, AND what
they did in this study was they induced, um,
an allergic response through a histamine healthy normal people
and they they induce this this this uh allergic
response, um, which created a wheel, which is another
name for the sort of itchy rash, red rash
that you get in your skin, uh, when you
have an allergy or it's irritated. And what they
did was they, they offered people basically a placebo
cream. Um, SO there was, there was no active
ingredient in this cream there I'm I'm veering into
some of the language that I say you shouldn't
use, but anyway, it was a cream that doesn't
really work. But they The manner in which people
were offered the creams the providers delivery was what
was what was experimentally under investigation in this. Um,
AND they basically, to cut a long story short,
find that the practitioners who delivered the treatment with
what looked like cus of high high level of
competence. So they were very confident, knowledgeable, and so
on. And high levels of empathy. Those patients experienced
placebo effects, a reduction in the size, measurable reduction
in the size of the response, the allergy response,
and those who were in the low competence, low
empathy delivery. ALLOCATION actually didn't didn't experience any diminishment
in the size of the wheel, the rash. So
how do we interpret that? And I say this
is a short study, needed replication, but Um, could
that have been that there was this sort of
um nocebo effect response going on that was mediated
by a perception. This person is incompetent. They're not
going to help me. They're not empathetic. You don't
look like they're trying to help me. And that's
what might have influenced um this kind of of
anticipatory response. So fascinating kinds of studies that that
begin to inch closer to what might be going
on here and how to elicit these responses or
not elicit them.
So can the nocebo effect be produced in different
ways in a clinical context?
Uh, IT could be. So again, through, it could
be through the behavior of the providers who say
it might even be, uh, you know, I'm not
advocating so feng shui in the clinic, but it
could be if you if you're in a clinic
that looks disorderly. That that might signal some sort
of level of incompetence, or it doesn't look as
clean as it could be, for example, there could
be certain cues in in the environment beyond the
practitioner that leads the the the patient to have
um. A negative anticipatory response, but it could also
be things that the provider is doing too. Do
they instill confidence or not? Um, DO they look
empathetic towards you or not, or are they are
they, are they being cold and disinterested and too
busy, so. And aside from all of that, what
is it they're telling you? What's the part of
suggestion here in terms of the information that they're
they're giving you, um, and if they're if if
it's negative information as well, that may, may lead
to these sort of negative expectancies.
And how can we distinguish real side effects of
treatments from nocebo effects, and is it important to
establish this distinction?
I think it's important to establish the distinction. I
think it's quite difficult to do, but it's certainly
possible to do. Um I think when we again
go back to with nocebo effects, these are likely
to be short-lived effects. They're not going to be
as severe effects. Some treatment side effects are going
to be, um, they're not unlikely to be dose
responsive. So a real treatment may, um, you know,
the higher the dosage, maybe the higher the level
of the toxicity, the negative, the side effects are
going to be. So, um, but again, you know,
we need more studies to to investigate whether that's
in fact the case for the nocebo effect. Um,
IT'S certainly possible to do, it's, it's challenging, um.
If we go back to the clinical trials where
um, Which are a great venue for um beginning
to identify some of these interesting effects, but they're
not a great way to isolate the nocebo effect,
for example, because as I said, there's a lot
of noise in a clinical trial. If you give
people if they're allocated to the placebo arm in
a clinical trial, um. And then they experience negative
effects as a result, that could be owed to
natural history. Some people are going to feel worse
anyway. It could be responder biases you're told that
there's a potential for side effects and you actually
just report them, but you don't experience them. It
could be attribution of of symptoms you already feel
you had one too many glasses of wine the
night before you didn't sleep well, whatever, and you
you you're misattributing. Some of those low grade symptoms
that any of us may feel at any time
to the side effects or whatever, and then as
a result, it would be a confusion, a conflation
to say those are nocebo effects. So um again
it requires a lot of ingenuity to try to
isolate exactly these specific effects, but the kinds of
experiments I mentioned are a good starting point for
thinking about how we do that.
So, I probably should have asked you this question
earlier, but why should we care about nocebo effects?
What kinds of consequences can they have?
Well, the first issue is that they can make
they can make people feel worse, and we don't
want to, particularly in the medical setting, we don't
want people to feel worse. Um, AND if people
are already experiencing, say they've got a chronic illness,
um, you're offering them medications, um, it could be
a tipping point scenario where, you know, even if
some of these these um The nocebo effect is
time limited. It's it's not as aggravating as some
other side effects may be. We don't want to
compound that, and we don't want people to really
to experience, to feel worse as a result. So
there's that issue of just um the negative effects
in themselves. Um, BUT there's also the issue of
people dropping out of care or becoming anxious about
taking medications. And so, uh, either through word of
mouth experiencing or experiencing these kinds of side effects,
um, there are health repercussions. I'll give an example,
um. 70% of the world's population had a COVID
vaccine. But many people, we don't actually have the
exact figures, many people didn't get a second vaccine.
Why is that one of the leading reasons was
side effects. Um, AND perhaps get into the literature
and nocebo effects, nocebo responses to the COVID vaccine,
but that in itself. THE public health consequences in
a sense of potential here for nocebo effects as
the cause of of health behaviors can be quite
serious. So from a small thing, big things can
emerge. Um LOOK at if you consider lack of
very paternalistic term, but lack of adherence to medications,
bad patients not taking their medications. But a lot
of the reasons. And that is side effects. So
in the US alone, it's about 100,000 deaths every
year because people don't take their medications as they've
been prescribed. So it's a serious issue. It's a
costly issue as well. I think it's figures of
$100 billion in the US every year because of
failures, the consequences of failures to take medication. So,
um, It can be a costly issue, um, both
literally and figuratively, the patient's health. So it's it's
the it's it's the downstream consequences, I think that
might be some of the most severe issues here.
Uh, BUT can nocebo effects do actual clinical harm
to people more than just producing more side effects
and leading people to quit their treatments?
Um, I think it's a very, very good question.
Uh WHAT are the extent because we don't want
to exaggerate the the the effect size here. I
think that would be a big mistake. Um, I
think it's an I don't really want to answer
the question because I don't know. Um, BUT I
would suspect that as I've said, these are limited
effects in many ways. Um. It depends how one
wants to interpret harm, I suppose, to the extent
of the harm, but I think it's open to
empirical questioning. So for example, if the study that
Fabrizio Benedetti carried out, you know, if patients really
need higher levels of pain medications as a result
of behaviors within the clinic, um. You know, if
you, if you're experiencing a much higher threshold of
pain, that's not a good thing. Now, the extent
to which the pain can be dialed back through
behaviors that could reduce those sort of nocebo effects
is an open question. We might even say like,
what is the actual dosage of morphine that you
over and above you've got to get what is
the equivalency? Um, BUT Uh, you know, there is,
I, I, I would be cautious here too. It's
it's a good question because in general as I
said before, we've got, we've got to pay attention
to, especially when the field is hot when you've
got this idea of the mind body problem, the
placebo effect and nocebo effect, you know, we're doing
an interview on it. I've done different kinds of
media things on the placebo effect. Um, IT'S a
hot field and there's always a tendency to exaggerate
effect size unwittingly sometimes, but scientists do it too,
because you know you can court a bit of
media attention, and there is this publication bias too,
of course you find. FINDINGS, they're more likely to
be published, canonized, cited widely, fewer replication. So that
we should be, uh, as I do due diligence
and not exaggerate what possibly is going on here.
So are they harmful? They're not pleasant. How do
we want to decide what's harmful. It's an open
question.
Mhm. And can words themselves produce harm? I mean,
if, for example, a procedure is expected to produce
some pain and doctors mention it beforehand, can it
cause even more pain than it was supposed to?
It could do. Um, SO again, we could take
a look at that open open hidden paradigm, the
study by Fabrizio Benedetti, where what was simply disclosed
or not communicated did make a difference to reported
harm and for the need for medication. Um, AND
we've got other studies that suggest similar things that
you know, what is communicated is what makes the
difference to patients, um. I give another example um
of, again, this was from Eli Crum's lab where
they did um a fascinating study on and this
this study actually lasted for around 6 months. So
patients with peanut allergies, um, And the treatment for
that is just to sort of give a dose
dosage of the peanut in order to get the
antibodies levels up. And in both groups, they actually
communicated that you will feel side effects of this
treatment intervention. There's going to be some discomfort scratchiness
in your throat, and they advised them both in
the randomized control both groups were told the same
information, but in one group, they were told that's
the signal the treatment's working, you know, stick with
it. So it was positively framed. And in fact,
that made a difference to sticking with the treatment
regime, to the extent I think it was only
4% of people dropped out whenever they were given
the positive framing versus the 20% who weren't told
you this is a positive signal, reframe reframing, reinterpreting
the negative side effects. And in fact at the
end of the 6 months, patients and the positive
mindset, the positive uh framed information had higher levels
of antibodies, so the treatment actually did work. Um,
SO there we're getting at. How you can manage
expectations in a way that's positive for patients that
actually can mean that they, they adhere to treatments,
they stick with it, uh, they're less anxious and
fearful and um. You can help overcome what potentially
the side effects, possibly be via dialing back the
nocebo effects or negative expectancies about what how to
think about these negative effects. So there there are
going to be many ways, I think, in which
providers, especially if they had the time to do
it, but um. Could be better managing patients' expectations
leading to more desirable health outcomes. Mhm.
Um, ARE healthcare professionals aware of the nocebo effect?
Uh, DO they underestimate it? Um, I mean, what
do we know about that?
I, we don't know a great deal about it,
but when we wrote the book, we suspect that
that uh just through almost a data as well,
healthcare professionals don't know as much about the nocebo
effect. It's been this overshadowed phenomenon, which is interesting
in itself, but we suspected that there's just not
that much awareness about it. Interesting, so when I
speak to people about it, they'll say I've never
heard of that, but they've heard of the placebo
effect. So I think more, more education, more literacy
around that could only be a good thing and
it be beneficial for patients to know as well
because they can begin to find ways to manage
their own expectations or my own case, I don't
like to read the side effects of medications I
think knowledge isn't always power, you know, so in
that scenario, I don't really want to know. Yeah.
So, uh, let me ask you two questions 2
or 3 questions about psychotherapy specifically. So, uh, and
please correct me if I say something wrong here,
but it seems that it doesn't matter much what
type of psychotherapy is used. They all tend to
work more or less equally well. If this is
the case and the different uh kinds of psychotherapy
are Based on different theoretical approaches to human psychology
and apply sort of different methodologies. Does it mean
that we might be dealing with placebo effects here?
I mean, could it be that psychotherapy is mostly
placebo?
It's a really big question. Um, YEAH, so there
is this debate in the evidence base in psychotherapy,
how to interpret the findings, there's some controversy over
it too, I will say, but so, for example,
Bruce Wamold is a researcher in this field who
advocates the perspective, he says. It doesn't really matter
what treatment you give. It could be a sort
of cognitive behavioral therapy. It could be more of
a rosarian humanistic therapy. It could be a psychodynamic
the embarking these archival digs into your personal history
your childhood and all the rest. It doesn't really
matter what you do that um they all tend
to have. They're much of a muchness and sometimes
this is called the dodo bird hypothesis from Lewis
Carroll's book where the dodo bird had said, you
know, there's a race and all everyone has one
all must have prizes. So how do we explain
then the effectiveness because psychotherapy is quite effective, it's
very effective for many patients, so not all. Um,
BUT, uh, what is going on and then sort
of as a result of that, uh, is this
idea of the common factors hypothesis. So there must
be factors that are common across all versions of
therapy that are what make the difference here. And
so it's getting into what could those core. Uh,
FACTORS B and they're thought to be things like
the therapists effect, so it could be high levels
of empathy, could be, you know, signals of competence
and so on to. It could be that the
patient has higher expectations. They find a theory behind
it plausible, um, something that they can get on
board with. So is there sort of a core
set of um Uh, factors there that may be
making a difference and then some people say, look,
all of those factors are really related to inducing
placebo effects and that therefore, it maybe is just
a placebo. I think it gets murky here because
I don't really want to say that it would
be a placebo, but I don't also think so
the idea is it all just a placebo placebo
effect. Um, AND, and researchers like Jensa is a
researcher at the University of Basel has. Notably, um,
advocated that that might be be what all the
place that psychotherapy is, and therefore, we should be
communicating to patients, uh, what actually is going on
here, um. So I would say that uh I,
I, I wouldn't have, I wouldn't, I don't believe
that that's necessarily. I don't think that that psychotherapy
is just a placebo effect. I think there's possibly
other things that are going on in a psychotherapy
encounter. That could be beneficial to patients. I don't
want to digress too much, but it's a couple
of thoughts on this. I say depression is an
adaptive response, for example, but you know, in some
scenarios in modern environments, you know, we're getting more
and more depressed. What might be a way to,
if you think about theories as to why people
get depressed. Couple of theories one is it's an
analytical rumination hypothesis, when you're depressed, you're more likely
to think deeply about difficult social problems, and so
it's a way of socially withdrawing, thinking more about
them. Is it possible that in some psychotherapy contexts
that the therapist actually facilitating you working through those
problems, and that's what's. ON the top of the
fact that you're getting this boost of possibly placebo
effects. Possibly that's what's going on. It could be
that additionally that you're, you're the therapist is a
role model, for example, of how to, how to
behave differently. Of course, the therapists say that's exactly
not what they're doing. They would never tell their
client how to improve their behavior, possibly that there
is some kind of role modeling happening. So I
think there are many, many, uh, it's under determined
what exactly is going on in psychotherapy, um. But
certainly we could say it's a forum whereby people
could be induced to to have a more positive
expectancy about am I going to feel better as
a result of this process or not? And there's
also it's also an arena where suggestability people particularly
in a vulnerable state may be induced if they're
already feeling skeptical, depressed. ANXIOUS, could be made to
feel worse. It might not always be beneficial to
ruminate over problems, particularly if there's not much of
a solution where the therapist isn't offering suggestions of
what look like plausible solutions. You could feel worse.
Um, AND I sort of go back to Scott
Lillian, the late Scott Lillian, um, who very iconoclastic
figure and very necessary figure in. AND psychology, who
was one of the first really to to say
that um around he has around 10% of patients
felt worse as a result of psychotherapy. We don't
talk about that enough, I think because we possibly
tend to think when people are undergoing a treatment,
a talking cure, so to speak, that there's not
really any potential for harm, but in fact that
there could be. Uh, THROUGH a variety of means,
one of which might be nocebo effects. You just,
you just don't you feel worse.
So psychotherapy can harm, it can produce nocebo effects
as well.
I think it's certainly think that that that's a
very real possibility. So if we go back to
the study on um the the Lauren House study,
for example, which looked at perceptions of competence and
empathy. Now if those influence the size of placebo
effects and potentially we don't. Again, we don't have
enough research on this, but say they also influence
nocebo effects. If you're sitting with a psychotherapist, and
you don't have a grid, you don't think that
they're they're particularly competent, or that they're they're not
being as empathetic to your needs as they could
be, that might influence you to feel have negative
expectations about. Not only your current health, but about
this provider is not going to be able to
help me. So you drop out of care, you
think, and everything feels worse and you think well
nobody can help me now, or you know, you
start to feel considerably worse about your situation. So
I would suggest that certainly it's plausible that psychotherapy
um could lead to negative effects for patients.
What about the use of labels and diagnosis in
psychotherapy and even the medical system more generally? Can
those produce uh nocebo effects as well?
Yeah, it's an interest again, really interesting question. Um,
AND I think we sort of secular trend of
lower thresholds for mental health conditions and diagnostic classifications.
Um WITHOUT again we don't want to get into
the sphere of saying, you know, but I think
that there's can be a good case to be
made in the modern world, more and more people
actually are more depressed, they're more anxious and so
on too. But certainly, um, Uh, the, the over
medicalization of, of, of many everyday experiences, some of
which may not be in the realm of of
of of medically significant, but are just, you know,
problems with living, um. If there's a tendency to
over medicalize those, you get to tell people there's
something wrong with you as opposed to I see
most people feel lousy sometimes or or whatever. This
is part of life. Um, THERE could be a
risk that you're inducing people to to have a
perfectionistic idealistic perspective. OF theirs of what life life
ought to be like, and that as a result,
they have a really negative set of expectancies that
in fact induit nocebo effects that could lead people
to feeling just generally anxious and more depressed, um,
more worried about their life. So, um, I think,
I think that there is a real risk of
that certainly do, yeah.
So going back to the COVID vaccine for a
minute because you've already mentioned it briefly earlier in
our conversation. Um, SO, now and then we hear
claims from people about supposed COVID vaccine side effects.
How do we go about distinguishing real side effects
of the vaccines from nocebo effects?
Yeah, so the really interesting literature came out of
the clinical trial data for the COVID-19, the COVID
vaccine. So when you, various researchers looked at the
data and they found that people who were allocated
to The saline vaccine, the fake vaccine, also reported
side effects. Um, AND depending on the the meta-analysis
that you looked at, a couple of them were
published. One attributed as much as 2/3 of the
vaccine side effects. To uh to nocebo and the
use of nocebo phenomenon. Another one said 3 quarters
of the side effects were. Why did they say
that? Because again, the people who are in the
control who got the placebo vaccine um reported side
effects to. So it seemed like that which is
really interesting because it's possible that as a result
of uh a few things going on here, and
this is where it's almost the, the um Clinical
trials are not an amazingly good place to isolate
nocebo effects nor placebo effects, because there's so much
noise in them, but it could have been that
because an amalgam of things, it could have been
responder biases, that is, you know, you're told that
there's certain side effects and then you just you
mimic them, you know, unintentionally sort of people pleasing
response to researchers. It could have been um. Again,
misattribution of certain low level low grade symptoms that
one already faces could be natural history, but it
also could have been genuinely in that case, people
were told about the side effects and as a
result they did start to feel worse or it
could have been, well, that's that's that's that's possibly
what was going on in which case. SAY whatever
was happening in the in the group who received
the actual vaccine over and above, that might have
been the the the genuine side effects associated with
the vaccine, which were not that many proportionately compared
to to when you received a placebo. So, um,
Yeah, so isolating those effects and this is uh
uh differentiating them from genuine and nocebo effects is
really, really tricky from the noise of if you
like, more broadly, you could talk about the nocebo
response, uh. TRICKY situation to to isolate those. I'm
not sure if that quite answers the question, but
uh yeah so.
So let me ask you a different kind of
question now. When it comes to media reports, because
sometimes we get negative media reports of certain medicines,
can they produce nocebo effects as well? And I
mean, in this particular case, since we're focusing a
little bit here on the COVID vaccine. Is it
that, for example, the media communicating about potential side
effects of the vaccine might have contributed to producing
nocebo effects in people. And I mean, I would
imagine that this is a sort of delicate question
or delicate thing to explore because Of course, from
the perspective of uh medical, the ontology, the ontology
potential side effects have to be communicated to patients,
but it can be done by doctors, not necessarily
by the media. So, I mean, what do you
think about this?
So, yes, it, it's, again, I mean, the media
could play a role here, um. And I think
it's, it's, it's really challenging to answer this question
because it it does, I mean, so the media
we know that people are more attentive to negative
information, um. Uh, YOU know, and again, there's sort
of an evolutionary, uh, evolution has sort of bequeathed
a kind of an heirloom and that respect and
that we tend to pay attention it's more adaptive
in our history to have paid attention to negative
information to be to be more ready to respond,
um, um. Uh, BUT, and that's, we know the
media, you know, if it bleeds it leads, you
know, so, so there's overreporting of negative information. Now,
does that potentially induce nocebo effects? I don't think
we know. But um it could certainly be part
of it. There could be a contributory factor there
for uh communicating in a in a scale what
a doctor might be communicating about a vaccine. Um,
SO I see no reason to think that it
it couldn't possibly be contributing to nocebo effects if
you have what you think is medical information and
that influences in the moment when you're receiving the
medication, you're, you're, you're aware you what you think
might be the case. I think it's, it's certainly
a possibility, how you measure these things sort of
as a Cognitive anthropologist and you work out what
is making the difference, what kind of exposure people,
gets really, really tricky to do that. Um, BUT
I think that sort of on the face of
it, there's no reason to think that there couldn't
be a contributory force if you will, in terms
of media communicating information at scale, as I said
to the public. Mhm.
And how can COVID-19 vaccines, uh, nocebo effects be
reduced?
Um, SO it could be they could be reduced.
Well, I'll give you an example actually of my
my own case. When I went to get the
COVID vaccine, the first vaccine, the nurse said to
me, um, You're going to feel a bit of
a, you know, it's going to feel a bit
of a pinch here in your skin, but 12
hours from now, she was highly specific about it,
and I wish she hadn't been. She said 12
hours from now you might start to feel pains,
shivers, um. Headaches, just take a couple of Tylenol,
which was in the States, in other words, take
paracetamol, and sure enough, like 12 hours later, I
looked at my watch, I really did and did
start to feel terrible. And part of me wondered,
you know, Being familiar with nocebo effects, I thought,
shit, is this just a nocebo effect, or in
fact, am I having a really negative reaction? Are
these genuine side effects. I was just second guessing
myself what's really going on, and I really didn't
feel at all well. So, was there a kind
of amplification through my negative expectancies as a result
of the information she gave me, possibly. So I
think what I would say in that case is
how could that nurse have handled it a little
bit better. Well, she could, she could have framed
the information a bit more positively instead of being
so definitive 12 hours from now, which, which made
her look highly competent and made me, you know,
it was just so specific. She could have said
something like most people don't experience side effects. If
you do, you can manage it with with Tylenol
or so positively framing the information while preserving the
truthfulness is 11 route forward. Um, AND that might
be a way to manage, could have been a
way to manage nocebo effects in relation to, to
the extent that they they arose in relation to
the COVID vaccination, any kind of medical treatment. So
thinking here about. Uh, Daniel Cannes decisions there, you
know, framing information in a specific way, instead of
saying 30% of people might feel that you just
say 7 in 10 people don't experience side effects,
you're likely to be one of them, blah blah,
and so you're managing the expectations in a more
positive valence.
Mhm. So, uh, I mean, this is sort of
also related to COVID because it was a public
health issue. So how do nocebo effects manifest in
public health and how relevant are they in that
specific context?
Uh, AGAIN, it's, it's unclear. So there have been,
um, stories that relate to things like wind turbines
causing outbreaks of illness, but are these just as
a result of mass hysteria, which is a way
of saying, you know, it's it's on people's heads
and potentially then the placebo researcher sweeps in and
says, I could, I could colonize this particular phenomenon
for my own and maybe it's all nocebo effects.
So things like winter with another thing called Havana
syndrome. So diplomats that were associated with um visited
Havana in Cuba. There was If you look at
something and you'll see there was sort of we
open the book with mentioning this, the idea again,
nobody could understand what was the physical substrate of
the of these clusters of conditions. Some people with
so-called Havana syndrome, various as they say diplomats, people
who visited, there was some idea that, you know,
they'd fallen. THROUGH some toxicity, or else maybe it
was that they had succumbed to again some sort
of more localized hysterical response, which again is a
very negative connotation in saying that it was again,
all in their heads. It didn't really exist and
that they exaggerated as a result of it. They
fell ill. Um, I think again, we got to
be careful, including when it comes to a public
health level. There may well be we got to
be be intellectually humble here scientists need to recognize
it. It's particularly the medical community as well. Just
because we don't have a current explanation doesn't mean
that there's not going to be an explanation. And
of course, it is possible that nocebo these could
be manifestations of nocebo effects as well. Um, BUT
you know, I also tend to think that the
more ordinary explanation sometimes is the most likely and
it might be we just don't have all the
facts. We shouldn't rush to judgment and be too
journalistic in our interpretations either. Mhm.
So this is something that I think we've been
referring to throughout our conversation, but how does the
nocebo effect tie to medical ethics? I mean, what
kinds of questions does it raise uh in the
context of medical ethics?
Yeah, it's a great question. Um, SO in many
doctors are obliged to be nowadays they're obliged to
be open and honest with patients and to respect,
but particularly in the post-war era, Second World War,
you know, be open and honest with patients. You've
got to be truthful about the The state of
their diagnosis, but also offering them treatment options and
and disclosing to them relevant facts that could inform
their decision on furnish some of the information they
can make a choice and informed choice. To that
end, um, the nocebo effect is is a sort
of slightly disrupting force in healthcare ethics because uh
you doctors also have a duty to first do
no harm and the Hippocratic goes, you know, sometimes
it's inevitable you can't, you can't undergo surgery without
an incision. YOU know, but is there an unnecessary
harm as a result of disclosing certain information. So
it's a case of what's the trade-off between these
two ethical principles. The one is to respect the
autonomy of the patient to be truthful with patients,
versus you don't want to cause harm unnecessarily. So
that's one source of tension. Another source of tension
is potentially for justice and health care. So, um,
is there a an unequal distribution of nocebo effects
or placebo effects, which is an interesting question in
relation to how people fare in the clinic visit.
Um, SO, Some patients may be um Subject to
more unintentional discrimination biases may be very surprising. We
know there's a body of literature, some of which
is contested for sure, but there are interesting differences
in how people experience care systematically shows that, you
know, on the basis of, you know, your sex,
your age is, um. RACE ethnicity, body weight as
well. So how your provider is responding to you,
the quality of information they give the time they
give cues of empathy towards the individual. Um, IT
would be surprising in a way if some people
didn't fare a little bit more. So there's possibly
an issue of justice in the distribution of these
effects to that. Be a more overshadowed consideration in
healthcare ethics and how it intersects with placebo studies,
but that could be another area that's something I've
written a little bit about as well. But um
open question or some of us doing worse in
the clinic visit because of nocebo effects. Mhm.
And which kind of strategies can be adopted by
both clinicians and patients to reduce the nocebo effect?
Yeah, so, um, some of it could be that
framing of information that we mentioned. Excuse me, so
positively framing the information, we're following the lead of
empirical studies by Aliyah Crumman and her colleagues in
positive mindset, so saying, you might experience negative things,
but that's the thing, things are going to improve
for you. um. That the medication's working or whatever,
of course that also induces certain ethical questions too,
is that really, is that really ethically honest or
do we need a higher order sort of disclosure
but I'm going to tell you this information that's
therefore going. Um, I don't think any provider has
time to disclose that level of of of nuance,
but, um, it could be that it's about framing
information. The other aspect is taking the time, it's
the words that one chooses to use, um. Showing
due sensitivity to patients, um. There's some suggestions among
medical ethicists that, you know, it's about to reduce
nocebo effects could be via something called authorized concealment.
So you tell the patient, I think this is
a psychologically sanitized and a bit unrealistic variety of
perspective telling the patient, you know, there are side
effects. I don't, you know, do you authorize me
to tell you that what the side effects are
and the patient can say yes or no, but
I think that flags up the information that's probably
emotionally relevant and you're more likely to induce the
patient to get online and see what the hell
are these side effects that this doctor doesn't want
to tell me so. Um, I think that probably
would be counterintuitive, but I think there are ways
in which you can frame information, present information, present
yourself as a provider, uh, easier said than done,
but that these things could be, if we could
adopt them a little bit more, that would be
beneficial. And then the other thing I I I
I I should mention here is um. The use
of generative AI is interesting here too, because we're
seeing I've done studies on this too. Doctors are
increasingly using generative AI chatbots, including commercial chatbots which
they shouldn't be using, such as chat CPT to
assist them with their documentation. So a letter writing
to patients, um, so many countries you can now
get access to your online medical records, which could
be another forum for inducing placebo and nocebo effects
too. But if your doctor is presenting it using
one of the top usages for the. DOCUMENTATION according
to doctors, those who adopted. So they may be
trying to write their notes more sensitively, um, and
using that as a tool to to present information
in a way that is framed more in a
more desirable fashion. Uh, AND then second to that
is, um, Patients use of generative AI, which is
a whole separate concern, um, but, uh, I don't,
there's studies which suggest that generative AI is is
much more empathetic than doctors and responding and blinded
clinic blinded trials, experimental trials. So patients might actually
it's an interesting question that receive more placebo effects
from a chatbot than they do from their their
their doctor. That's a whole other question and maybe
a whole other hour of discussion, um, but yeah.
Yeah, so one last question then. If, for example,
there are doubts about the effectiveness of certain treatments,
how should doctors communicate about them to their patients
to avoid inducing nocebo effects?
I think doctors should, they should communicate honestly, honestly.
I mean, that's what you need to do that
if they're uncertain about the treatment, uh they've got
to be honest about that. But a way to
frame it may be to say, look, uh, we
don't know what the particular effects may be here,
but it may be that And then frame it
possibly by saying that this this might might work
for you. We're all individuals here. Most of these
studies are population based studies. This might work for
you. Give it a go. Let's see how, you
know, things you could still positively frame the information
in a way that the individual leaves the clinic
thinking, I'm trying something. They have a more positive
effect, uh, more positive attitude that that. To the
extent that these effects are relevant, uh, they could
be dialing them down the negative side effects. Mhm.
OK. So, Charlotte, anything else about uh the nocebo
effect that I might have missed in my questions?
Anything else we should know or not?
I think probably the biggest area here, the most
exciting area will be the use of generative AI
as it sort of gradually creeps in to both
patients use of these tools to search for health
information. So how these tools tend to be I
don't know if you've ever played around with them,
but they are consistently very polite, no matter what
you say throughout them. Um, AND there may be
that consistency and and the the valence of the
responses that some of these chatbots can give rapidly
and in a conversational way to a patient when
they're seeking. INFORMATION might might actually influence uh nocebo
effects, placebo effects, um, but may also um influence
when people do seek help from their provider. So
we're we're sort of entering a sphere, I think
of triadic care. You've got the provider, you've got
these chatbots that we tend to anthropomorphize and so
on, and you as a patient. So I think
that intersection will be a very interesting thing. Something
I'm I'm I'm focused on writing about at the
minute, but I think that's an area that future
discussions in this field will get into. And indeed
high clinicians lean on these tools as well, increasingly,
um, whether it is to improve their communication, um,
through the kinds of responses that they preferable responses
to patients. Uh, BUT they're they're increasingly using these
tools. They're not going to go away. So that
would be the thing that I think's around the
corner, but we don't yet have enough research on.
And in general, we just should close by saying
we just don't have enough research into the nocebo
effect, and we do need more replications. Mhm.
OK, great. So just before we go, where can
people find you when you work on the internet?
And by the way, would you like to tell
us a little bit about your upcoming book?
Yeah, so um I'm on Twitter and Blue Sky
and LinkedIn at CR Blaze um and you can
see my public here I should. Uh, MY Uppsala
University web web pages, I don't update enough, but
um my publications are available on Google Scholar, um.
And yeah, my, my, I also have a sub
stack laze on Doctor Bot where I write about
AI healthcare ethics and other considerations. But yeah, I've
got a book coming out in September called Doctor
Bot when human doctors feel us and how AI
can save lives, um, which is somewhat um. PROVOCATIVE
title, but it's really about how uh humans, human
doctors have an enormous task on their hands in
modern healthcare, and it's about high. Sometimes doctors do
feel this, even though I mean they're they're working
on incredible pressures, but I look at the psychological
limitations of doctors on what it is they do,
keeping up to date with information and and all
the rest of it. And I look at how
AI may prove to be an important work around
um to improving care in the long term. So
it's a It's a book that's focused on the
psychology of the visit and what AI could do
to improve patient outcomes. It's a very patient centric
book, but Possibly a bit provocative as well, but
they'll start a conversation, I hope.
Great. We're very much looking forward to it and
I really hope to have you back on the
show when it's out and thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been really fun and informative to talk with
you.
Thank you, Ricardo. I look forward to seeing you
again too. Thanks a lot.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrook
field governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro
and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa.
Yannick Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbba Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zaledrianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bortolotti
Gabrielon Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.